Weave add playground history docs-410 (#2069)
wandb/docs: weave/guides/tools/playground.mdx

There are two ways to access the Playground:

1. _Open a fresh Playground page with a simple system prompt_: In the sidebar of a Weave project, select **Playground**. Playground opens in the same tab.
2. _Open Playground for a specific call_:
   1. In the sidebar, select the **Traces** tab. A list of traces displays.
   2. In the list of traces, click the name of the call that you want to view. The call's details page opens.
   3. Click **Open chat in Playground**. Playground opens in a new tab.

<Frame>
![Screenshot of Open in Playground button](/weave/guides/tools/imgs/open_chat_in_playground.png)
</Frame>

## Select an LLM

You can switch the LLM using the **Select a model** dropdown in the prompt header (top of the main Playground panel). The available models from various providers are listed below:

- Amazon Bedrock
- Anthropic
- Azure
- Deepseek
- Google
- Groq
- Mistral
- OpenAI
- X.AI

{/* USE make update_playground_models */}
{/* LLM_LIST_START, DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION */}
{/*  Removed list of models since it changes so frequently 1/2026. Leaving surrounding wrapper because it implies there is a script to pull this from somewhere? in case we want it back someday. */}

> {/* LLM_LIST_END, DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION */}

Reviewer: You can delete this, too. They had some automation on the old Weave site that used to keep this list updated, and this stuff was a part of that.

The available models depend on the providers configured for your team.

## Customize Playground settings

### Adjust LLM parameters

You can experiment with different parameter values for your selected model. To adjust parameters in the Playground, do the following:

1. In the prompt header (top of main panel), click the **Chat settings (<Icon icon="sliders" iconType="regular" />)** button to open the **Chat settings** panel.
2. In the **Chat settings** panel, adjust parameters as desired. You can also toggle Weave call tracking on or off, and [add a function](#add-a-function).

> 3. Changes are applied automatically.  Click **Chat settings** again, or the **x** in the upper right corner, to close the panel.  The hover text for the **Chat settings** button updates to display the settings you have changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Changes are applied automatically.  Click **Chat settings** again, or the **x** in the upper-right corner, to close the panel.  The hover text for the **Chat settings** button updates to display the settings you have changed.
```

> If you leave the page, your settings will be lost.  To save your settings, [save your model](#save-a-model).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you leave the page, your settings will be lost. To save your settings, [save your model](#save-a-model).
```
extra space

If you want to discard your changed settings and start over, refresh the page.

<Frame>
![The Weave Playground showing the 'Select a model' dropdown open and the Chat settings panel open on the right.](/weave/guides/tools/imgs/playground_settings.png)
</Frame>

Playground allows you to generate multiple outputs for the same input by setting the number of trials. The default setting is `1`. To adjust the number of trials,  open the **Chat settings** panel and adjust the **Number of trials** setting.

### Add a function

You can test how different models use functions based on input it receives from the user. To add a function for testing in Playground,  in the **Chat settings** panel, click **+ Add function**. Follow the on-screen guidance to define the function and save your changes.

## Message controls
### Prompt definition area

> The **Prompt definition area** defines the instructions that shape model behavior for the duration of an interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Prompt definition area** lets you define the instructions that shape the model's behavior throughout an interaction.
```
maybe I'm being overly literal here, but the way it's worded now kinda made it sound like the field itself defines the instructions, not the humans interacting with it.

> Use this area to provide context that applies consistently before any messages are exchanged. This includes role definition, tone and style guidance, behavioral constraints, and output requirements.  Changes made here affect all subsequent interactions unless modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this area to provide context that applies consistently before any messages are exchanged. This includes role definition, tone and style guidance, behavioral constraints, and output requirements. Changes made here affect all subsequent interactions unless modified.
```

- Predefine user messages for testing specific scenarios.

### Messages panel

The **Messages panel** displays the conversation generated during execution.

It includes:
- Any predefined messages included in the prompt setup.
- Messages sent from the message composer.
- Responses returned by the model.

You can also **Copy**, **Delete**, **Edit**, and **Retry** messages inside the panel.

### Message composer (input field)

The **Message composer** is used to send new messages to the model.

It supports selecting the message role and submitting messages for execution. Most interactions are authored as **User** messages. **System** or **Assistant** messages can be added when testing instructions change.

<Frame>
![Weave Playground showing the prompt definition area at the top, message history in the middle, and a message composer for sending new messages at the bottom.](/weave/guides/tools/imgs/playground_chat_input.png)
</Frame>

## View message history

To view message history, click the **History (<Icon icon="clock-rotate-left" iconType="light" />)** button in the right-side Playground toolbar.  This opens a History panel showing all messages sent for the current project.  

> Selecting an item from the history automatically loads it into an additional chat panel for comparison. 

Reviewer: minor nit, but we should add a space between these two paragraphs

To edit information for a [previously created custom provider](#add-a-custom-provider), do the following:

> 1. In the prompt header, click the **Select a model** dropdown.  Then select **+Configure providers**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the prompt header, click the **Select a model** dropdown. Then select **+Configure providers**.
```

  * Alternatively, in the sidebar menu, you can select **Project**, and then select the **AI Providers** tab.
2. In the **Custom providers** table, find the custom provider you want to update.
3. In the **Last Updated** column of the entry for your custom provider, click the edit button (the pencil icon).
4. In the pop-up modal, edit the provider information.

> 5. Click **Save**.

Reviewer: not sure how you feel about it, but I like to add some confirmation sentence or clause at the end of instructions that reminds the user what they just did and/or tells them what happens when they complete the task, such as  "a message appears confirming that your changes have been saved."

Author: I addressed all your feedback except this one.  I'm interested to see what the rest of the team thinks, and if we want this to be our style, i'll do it.  But on this page there is prb 4 -5 places where the last instruction is some kind of a 'save' ... so that is adding 5 lines of, well, obviousness imo. imo it's not worth the clutter?
